Tell me, after Ivano left,
who were your players?
Is it Hansen?
Which other handball players
did you particularly respect
and wish to compete with individually?
For example, it was Dule Duvnjak,
who played at the same time as Ivano,
and later succeeded him
in that position.
Later, it was Mikkel Hansen
from the Danish national team.
I had a lot of duels against him.
And later we played together at PSG.
So, that rivalry between us
eventually settled down.
Because I have no ties to Denmark,
but I do have ties with Croatia.
My father was born there,
and my roots are from Croatia.
So, I've never experienced
that same feeling of rivalry
when playing against Croatia
and Ivano,
like I do when playing against
any other national team.
Of course, we fought against
M. Hansen and Denmark for a long time.
Now, they have caught up with us
and taken over that dominance.
Unfortunately, but that's the truth.
That's how it is in the world of sports.
It's true that we fought for a long time
against Mikkel to see who was better.
At the same time, we played together,
so we became friends.
And that rivalry is no longer as strong.
Was there ever a rivalry
between you and Luka?
And did you ever want to prove to him
what he had to do to reach your level?
Yes, I treated Luka like an older brother.
His story is incredible.
He played tennis really well.
Yes, we constantly played tennis
with our father and mother.
More for fun, and he was
really good at it.
At the age of ten, he decided
he only wanted to pursue tennis.
And when he was 20, he was
supposed to go to San Rafael,
so he could study and play tennis there.
Between the ages of 13 and 14, he was
number one player in France. -Yes.
I dreamed of traveling to Roland Garros
and Wimbledon and watching him play there.
We watched tennis matches,
watched Ivanišević winning Wimbledon.
We were his big fans.
Luka played tennis all day long.
Then, at the age of 19,
he decided to start playing handball.
That's when we started dreaming
about one day playing together.
It was an incredible time.
There was never any rivalry
between the two of us.
For example, if he won a tennis match,
I felt like it was my victory too.
When we started playing together,
I felt a lot of pressure because I wanted...
When he decided to return to handball at 19,
I was 23 or 24 at the time
and already the best player in the world.
I had already won an Olympic medal,
a World and a European Championship.
And suddenly, I had the opportunity
to play with Luka.
To teach him how to play,
to pass on all the knowledge
I had learned from Noka and from playing
with the French national team.
I had to help him.
It was an honor to play with my brother,
but at the same time, I felt pressure.
My goal was for us to succeed together.
That period was very emotional for me,
but I also felt a bit of pressure.
Because you didn't play alone.
I felt a kind of responsibility toward him.
Now, when you look back on your career
and speak clearly and simply...
What was it that made you well known?
Where did you feel you dominated?
Let's leave aside your mother's words
that you always knew what you wanted.
Where did that confidence
and responsibility come from,
to score the most goals in
the most important matches?
Was it your shooting,
or maybe your versatility?
What did you have that was better
than all the other players?
In my opinion, it was something inside me,
an "energy" that I had to be the best.
Of course, I was physically,
technically, and mentally strong,
but I had something internal.
I don't know where it came from -
maybe I inherited it from my father
or from my ancestors. That
was my greatest strength.
What you said is true.
I don't know why, but I always
played my best in finals. -That's true.
Now that my career is over,
and I watch some of those matches,
which I never used to do because
I always wanted to move forward,
I think to myself: how did I even
manage to score those goals?
In the first final against Pamplona,
in the Champions League with Montpellier,
I shot a "dry leaf" with my left hand.
When I watch some of those goals, it feels
like there was some higher force at play.
Like you were in a trance.
-Yes, there's a higher force.
My father always told me
that in the most difficult moments,
you see who the best players are.
When it's toughest. -Yes, in finals,
you see who the great players are.
Maybe I inherited that from my father,
but that was my biggest strength.
I had something in me
that helped me be the best.
The goal I would set for myself
was my biggest strength.
But you still had to have talent,
because there are many players
with a huge desire to win
but without talent.
Although, let's say...
There are players like Messi and
Ronaldo, or Federer and Đoković.
Newspapers wrote that Balić
was the new Mozart of handball.
So who would you compare yourself to?
Terminator, Rammstein, Wagner...
You had tremendous strength.
When you watch Ivano play,
it all looks easy, almost like
he's playing basketball.
For most of the goals he scored,
you can't even explain how he did it.
Like when you watch Federer,
tennis seems easy.
Or when you watch Messi. I was
maybe more like Đoković or Ronaldo.
Because I trained a lot,
I had discipline,
daily motivation to learn something new
and to become better.
I trained to reach my limit and maybe
even beyond what my physical
and mental capabilities allowed.
In that sense, I think
I'm more like Đoković.
We know he gives his all every day,
he's disciplined, and that
helps him to be the best.
And not just to be the best
but to constantly push
both physical and mental limits.
When you watch his matches,
you can sense there's something more.
Of course, he's technically,
tactically, and mentally very strong.
But there's something else-something
that can't easily be explained.
And that's something inside him.
-Exactly. He's a player that everyone
loves right away.
Maybe you weren't like that,
but you were a "monster"
and a guarantee for gold medal.
You know who I ran into recently,
and he said something really great
just a few days ago, when I was in Split.
I was having a coffee, and Drago Vuković
happened to walk by.
He sends his regards.
Drago was a great player
and a really good person.
I invited him over and told him
I was going to meet you.
He asked me if I knew who you really are.
He said, "He's Johnny Bravo."
I told him, well said,
Drago, that's exactly it.
So, you're Johnny Bravo.
There's something else
I'm curious about.
Many of my colleagues and players,
when we went abroad to play
and even Ivanišević confirmed
this a few days ago, they say
that people from this region
have something special within them.
We can say it's something unique
to people from the Balkans.
"You're a mix", your father is
Croatian, your mother is Serbian.
And on top of that, you're also French.
What have you noticed that we
Balkan people possess? I mean both
the positives and the negatives.
And what is it that the French
don't have and vice versa?
What I can say for sure is
that the French don't have
that motivation to become
someone in life. To succeed.
A hunger for success? -Yes, they don't
have that inner hunger for success.
That's something unique to people
from the Balkans and former Yugoslavia.
That doesn't exist in France.
Why? I don't know.
Maybe life conditions are better in France.
Maybe life is easier there.
They have more options?
-Yes, maybe they have more options.
I can't say for certain what it is.
If we look at the downside of that,
it's great to have that in sports,
but maybe it's something that even
led to the war in the Balkans.
To the breakup of former Yugoslavia.
You think we're too emotional?
-Yes, we're too emotional
and we have strong egos.
That's something positive to have
if you're doing sports
or business, in your work,
but when you step outside of all of
that, it's not always the best thing.
That's why I've tried to learn
about myself and about ego,
and I've noticed that it's not
always the best approach for life
and relationships with others.
I think a big difference exists there.
I've often asked myself why the greatest
athletes of all time, in every sport,
except for rugby
because the ball is different,
come from the former Yugoslavia.
When you look at it now, but also
even before, Đoković, Dončić, anyone...
Jokić... -Yes, Jokić. Also in water
polo, tennis, football with Modrić...
In all these major sports,
one of the best players in the world
has always come from this region,
the former Yugoslavia.
There's definitely something more to it,
of course, it's what we've talked about,
how they respect sports there,
how sports are integrated into schools,
how they teach technique,
tactics, and training.
But sport is something more there,
it gives you a chance to get out and
become someone, and that drives you.
That's great in sport,
but outside of sport,
in everyday life
and in human relationships,
it might not always be
the best way to live.
Here, unfortunately,
that's becoming less and less.
There's less and less
sport in schools...
I also noticed something
that the journalist from L'Équipe
pointed out a few years ago, and
I've formed an opinion around that.
He said something that doesn't quite fit
with elite athletes, the greatest ones,
because they have an ego, you have
an ego, too - you're a champion,
you're in that category. He said that
Karabatić's career lasted so long,
but it also evolved over time.
Nikola, in the beginning, was an
individual scoring goals, a real scorer.
Then, when he was at Kiel with Noka,
and later with the national team
after the departure of the greats
in 2012, he became a leader,
an organizer, a captain.
To be a leader and a captain,
you need to give something to your team.
You don't score 10 points per game
anymore, you score 7,
but you make them score 4 instead of 2.
And then they respect you more,
and the chemistry is better.
This isn't just your case,
it's similar to what Phil Jackson did
when Michael Jordan came to Chicago.
And then, toward the end of his career,
after injuries, during the Olympics,
when young players came in, he accepted
the role of not playing the whole game,
realizing he wasn't the best anymore,
but he was still the most important.
He was the main guy when it got tough on
the court, in both defense and offense.
So, it's similar to Modrić's role
now at Real Madrid, right?
That's great,
but it's also hard to accept.
Exactly, that's what makes sport great.
It teaches you that one moment
you're the world champion,
and the next moment you're losing a cup
against a second-league team,
and you're not the best anymore.
Sport teaches you that life is like that,
you're on top one moment,
and then nothing the next.
One moment you're great, and the next,
your father isn't with you anymore.
Sport teaches you that you
have to constantly evolve
and adapt to new situations.
That's something I've learned now.
When I was younger,
I didn't understand that,
but as time goes by,
you start to learn these things.
And it comes down to
what we talked about earlier,
you learn that you're not
the same player anymore,
that your role in the team is
no longer the same.
You learn to let your ego change,
and to find new motivations.
That's how I've learned
throughout my entire career.
Of course, when I first came,
I was just a kid, I had to prove myself
so that the older players
would accept me.
All those players
whose posters I had on my walls,
I had to prove to them
that I was the best.
I didn't say anything, I just gave my
all on the field and in training
so that they would accept me and I could
prove I deserved to be part of the team.
Then you prove yourself, and you start
becoming a good individual player,
you score goals, win titles,
and gain importance.
Others listen to you,
you become a leader,
and you realize that your behavior isn't
just about what you give on the field,
but off the field too. That discipline
you set for yourself encourages others.
You realize that being
a good player is great,
but when you see you can help
your teammates play well too,
that's an even stronger feeling.
I've learned this way.
Then I turned 37,
suffered a ligament injury,
and when I came back to the court,
I wasn't the same player anymore.
New players had joined the team, and
they also wanted to prove themselves.
That's when you learn to
take on a different role,
realizing that you are
no longer the captain,
and someone else is
taking that position.
Then you learn to put
your ego aside a little bit,
and if you want to play
for another two or three years,
you have to adapt to
these new situations.
You either think, "I'm Nikola Karabatić,
on the team I need to be the best
and most important player," or you say,
"I'm Karabatić, I'm getting older,
new players have arrived, they deserve
their moment, and now I help them."
So, you constantly have to evolve
and adapt to the situations.
The sooner you realize this, the better
you'll live through your career
and after it, the transition out
of your career into a new life,
where you're no longer a player...
I've achieved a lot, experienced a lot,
and that's great, but I'm no
longer a handball player,
and I have to learn how that can help me
move forward and live a better life.
It's a constant process.
You must constantly develop,
both as a player and as a person.
Fantastically said.
But it wasn't easy for you either,
it's not something simple.
And throughout your career,
you've seen a lot of examples of
"the bigger the player,
the bigger the ego,"
where they don't want to
accept their decline.
The best example of this
would be Ronaldo,
who still struggles to be
substituted by his coach
because he believes
he should still play 90 minutes,
thinking he plays like he used to,
but that's not the reality...
Fantastically said...
Yes, and when you watch that,
you learn something from other athletes,
how they react, and so on. For example,
Ronaldo is an excellent player,
and I would prefer to watch
Ronaldo at Manchester,
playing half of the game
or every other game,
but still playing and helping others.
Maybe not scoring three goals
every match, but scoring one goal
or providing an assist,
contributing to the team's success,
adapting to a new role
instead of going to Saudi Arabia.
Another important thing is learning to
be open, watching how others work,
getting inspired, noticing what you
might not like, what doesn't suit you,
and then adapting.
My path has been what it is...
When you get a physical injury,
it's also an injury to your ego.
Until I was 37, I never had any serious
injuries, I thought I was a machine,
that I could go through my whole career
without any major injuries.
I came back from the COVID break,
where I was, for four months, in the
best shape of my life at 37 years old,
and then I injured my ACL.
Two weeks after the surgery,
I got a thrombosis
and a pulmonary embolism.
That's when the ego comes in,
it shrinks.
You realize you're small... -Yes,
you realize you're not untouchable,
that I could've stayed in the hospital,
that I could've died...
From those experiences, you also learn,
and when you return to the field,
you have a different energy.
You're happy and positive
that you can still play handball.
You get that new energy
and motivation...
You're constantly learning from those
moments that brought you down to earth,
but made you stronger, maybe not
as a player, but as a person.
Or maybe you don't learn anything, and
those situations just repeat themselves.
You have to learn from every opportunity
life or your career presents
and become better as a player
or as a person.
Gosh, I mean...
This is the first time we're meeting,
but I have to say I'm impressed.
You're incredibly strong in your mind,
it feels like I'm reading a book about
"How You Should Behave" or talking
to a psychologist. I really admire you!
Tell me, how did you handle losses?
For example, did you suffer,
did you blame yourself?
There's a period in your life,
which may be a coincidence,
but I'm sure one thing
affected the other...
It was quite a turbulent year.
2011, you lost your father, right?
Then in 2012,
that scandal happened.
And 2013 was the only year
the championship wasn't won.
You were... Were you disappointed
in people? Did you "break," as they say?
Some in the public criticized you,
not like "he hit the post,"
but personal and nasty things.
I noticed you approached it strongly.
You even said, "I see this as a match
I must win. I will prove it."
Did your mindset help you
and how did you feel back then?
Yes, exactly. My mindset
back then helped me a lot,
because I thought I was facing
the hardest thing in life.
My father was gone.
He meant everything to me.
It was tough, but at the same time,
when something like that happens,
people love you, they're there for you.
If anything happens in life,
we're here to help.
-They feel for you.
It's hard, but people love you.
A year later, the scandal breaks
and everyone hates me.
I'm not allowed to play handball.
Then you see that a year ago
everyone loved you, wanted to help,
and a year later, they hate you,
wish you the worst.
You learn a lot from that.
What helped me? What you said.
I saw a new challenge in that,
a new game to win.
Now I'll prove this
can't break me. I'll be even better.
That's how I worked back then.
When I was younger,
losing hit me hard.
I cried, I felt horrible.
It was really tough.
Over the years I learned how
to handle losses.
At that time I thought like this:
It's a new challenge, new game,
I have to prove I'm better
and I'll become even better.
That's how I functioned, but I also
realized it drained my energy.
When you think and play like that,
it brings a lot of negative energy.
I always wondered
why it happened to me,
why it's not fair
people don't like me.
You read the news and see lies.
It hurts because every night
you carry that negative energy
to bed, and it pushes you
to prove you're the best
the next day, but it pulls you down.
Over time I learned to leave
all that aside,
that hatred I carried inside,
that pushed me to become
even better and to return.
I worked hard to suppress it,
to understand why it all happened,
what was behind it,
why Montpellier acted that way,
why the media wrote that way.
To not... how do you say...
-To forgive them.
Not to forgive, to understand,
to accept it and not live with hate.
I worked hard on myself so it
wouldn't... -Eat at you for life.
Many would've broken.
These are huge things lasting years.
It's two years when you sum it up.
-Yes, it lasts... -And at first...
At first, it eats you up
and then you come out stronger.
It's like a game, a challenge.
As time passes,
you see it gnaws at you, annoys you,
your reactions aren't good.
If you want to live positive and normal,
you have to push it aside and accept it,
and move on. Now I think
if it didn't happen to me,
I wouldn't be here now, nor would I
have had such a career.
I wouldn't be happy today,
nor would we talk about it.
It helped me and now I look
at it from a distance
as something positive
that happened to me.
From that ugly situation something
good came out. -Well said.
Those sporting failures -
your career is impressive,
of course, there were losses.
But what are they, really?
You didn't win the Champions League
with Paris, or the last Olympics -
would've been ideal to end it like that?
-I don't know what was hardest.
Of course, if we'd won with PSG,
the Champions League, amazing.
Could you have? -We were in the final,
lost to Vardar in the last second.
Čupić scored. Of course it's hard.
At the Olympics, losing like that
in the quarterfinals...
You're up by two with 15 seconds left.
That can't happen. But it did.
It's so hard, that's what sport is.
At the same time, I worked so much
on myself and learned to see
things from another angle.
I never thought I'd...
As a kid, I wanted to play for my country
and be the best in the world.
Looking back on what I've achieved,
I can't complain - and shouldn't.
It's very hard to end a career
with that kind of loss,
in front of all of France.
How many were in Lille?
In the stadium, 28 thousand people.
Family, friends, everyone.
That was very hard, but I also had
so many amazing moments,
I wouldn't trade it. That too was
a challenge - to end my career
with that kind of loss.
But it pushed me to work on myself.
I can't carry that disappointment
into a new life.
That pushed me to grow.
I wouldn't change it.
Of course I'd be happy
if I'd won a medal...
But you can't have it all. -If I had,
maybe I'd be Minister of Sport now.
That wouldn't be good for me.
It's amazing how you grow
in your career and in your mind.
How did you feel as a young player?
You said in 2003 Onesta took you
to the championship, but you didn't play?
-Yes. -You were just there.
What did you think? Did you think
you could play,
or were you just impressed to be there?
You'd already won the Champions League.
That was before. -A year before?
-Onesta took me to the tournament.
I was injured right before.
He said, "You'll go to Portugal."
I'd be the 16th player - he named 15
and if a goalie got hurt, I'd be in.
That's what he told me,
and as a kid I was just happy.
Going to a championship at 18,
a dream come true.
After two games the goalie didn't
get hurt, Croatia beat France,
and the team was in chaos.
Onesta didn't put me on the roster.
I waited. Maybe the next match?
No. Maybe one more? No.
He never added me. I played
the bronze medal match.
I warmed up with the team,
then he put me back in the stands.
But I got a medal.
He didn't say a word.
At 18, of course, you don't
ask the coach why you didn't play.
Next match he didn't call me either.
That was a friendly vs Germany.
But J. Fernandez got injured,
and he called me up.
I scored 10 goals. -Right away.
He couldn't take me
off the list anymore.
It was hard and I didn't understand.
Now I do, because it was hard.
The coach was new, under pressure,
they lost to Croatia.
Maybe he didn't want to include me
so I wouldn't be the one to save France.
He was afraid of my start.
I felt like he feared me,
that I might disrupt the team,
the relationships with older players.
He feared a lot of things.
We didn't have the best relationship at first.
Later it got better. In 2003,
that hit me pretty hard,
but it gave me more motivation
to prove myself because he
didn't want me in the team...
-And that's motivation too.
In the end, you see everything
as motivation.
It's fascinating, that's the best,
but it's not easy.
You turn everything into motivation,
everything you can.
You turn it into a challenge,
not something to stop you,
mess up your head or confidence.
That's great, Nikola. Well done.
We have to talk about handball.
I'm no expert, but I watch handball.
When the big tournaments happen,
it's not just the handball world.
The whole sports world
focuses on handball.
It's a simple sport, I think.
Very physically demanding.
There are constant duels,
always pushing.
But it's not about brutality.
I think there's not enough speed
for anything to happen
when speed and mass meet.
It feels more like wrestling.
But it's exhausting. -Games are not
exhausting or the rough play or contact.
The hardest part of handball
is the playing rhythm.
When you play for PSG,
in Kiel, in Barcelona,
in a tough league, the Champions League,
for the national team...
You're playing every third day -
that's 70 matches a year.
With the national team,
each year you play either
the European or World Championship.
And when it's the Olympics,
you have the European Championship,
the World Championship,
and Olympics all in one year.
That's the hardest part.
Every third day you play, travel...
You know how it is-you travel,
you play, you come back...
You have to win every match.
And that's the toughest part, because
that match rhythm never stops.
Except when you get injured,
you never get a break.
And that's the hardest thing.
Of course there's contact in handball,
but our sport isn't rugby,
where players hit each other
and it's very violent.
There's physical contact in handball too,
but the rhythm is the tough part.
You play for the national team, come back,
and the Champions League continues...
If your league is strong,
like in Germany or France,
you must be mentally prepared,
motivated - never letting yourself
fall into the trap of every day
feeling the same, losing drive.
Physically too, you must be ready
to endure 70 games a year.
That's why handball is a tough sport.
This interests me as a coach,
and I asked Ivanišević about it,
even though tennis is
an individual sport.
But in handball, at major tournaments,
you often play every day.
You play day after day.
That's 60 minutes.
There are rotations, sure, but for example,
you play the whole match,
Metličić plays the whole match...
That would be impossible in football.
How can you play every day?
Yeah, in football that's not possible,
because you run a lot,
there are many sprints,
the distance is greater...
But there's less contact.
-Yeah, not much contact.
In handball, you must be strong...
-The contact wears you down.
... physically, so you can endure it,
so the contact doesn't drain you.
You must be mindful of everything
and be physically prepared.
What helped me was that
I was always physically ready.
My father always told me
that it's not enough
to just be the best at handball.
If you want to be successful,
you must be physically ready too.
If there's running,
you must be the best at that too,
also in the gym, in school...
If you're smart,
you'll understand situations
and grow properly.
So that's also very important
for every athlete.
You must understand
that talent alone isn't enough.
It has to be the whole package.
In football, handball, basketball -
everything you do matters.
Sometimes, hard work and discipline
are more important than talent.
That's especially true in handball
if you want to reach a high level.
If you play in the first league,
you'll need to play
at least 30 games a season,
and that's already tough.
And that's great.
But if you want to reach the next level
and play 70 games a season,
then you must invest
in all those areas.
What kind of impact does
the coach have,
not the coach as a group leader,
but tactically?
Here, we talk a lot and debate
about 6:0, 5:1, 3:2 defenses...
Is that really important and
decisive, or is the group
and the transition game more
crucial in today's handball,
where it's constantly
running back and forth?
There's this story - actually,
not an anecdote but a real story -
that during the Rio Olympics,
in the semifinal against Germany,
when they caught up
after you had a big lead,
you called a timeout and asked
for a play you hadn't used in years.
What I love about handball
is the tactics.
My father helped me a lot with that,
because he was a goalkeeper.
When I went to Montpellier,
I learned a lot there,
but I really learned precision,
technique, and tactics with Noka.
It's like playing chess. You follow
where each player is positioned,
and even though you don't
have the ball, your position
on the court is very important.
Because if you move a little,
you create more space
for your center back and left wing...
Everything you do on the court
has significance. -It has its purpose.
I learned so much from Noka,
that I learned to think that way
and continued to pass it on
to the guys on the national team.
So, I had a lot of responsibility
on the national team.
And that timeout against Germany.
It often happened that the coach
would call a timeout
and say something, and I would
suggest something else.
I was always lucky that the coaches
respected and valued my input.
After that timeout, we changed
the game and tried a new tactic.
Danijel looked at me and asked
if I was sure, because he was supposed
to shoot from the right back position.
I told him I was sure and that he'd score
100% if he did it that way.
We executed the play, and he scored.
Now, when I look at that play,
I see we didn't do it perfectly,
but we still managed to score.
And I'm proud of that too.
That means you'll be a coach.
You'll be a coach.
When our players, the media, the fans,
everyone, talk about the difference
between France and Croatia at that time,
they usually mention Omeyer.
Everyone says how well he defends.
Yes, he defended the best against us.
How crucial is the role
of the goalkeeper in handball?
Extremely crucial.
If you ask goalkeepers,
they'll tell you they're responsible
for 80% of the team's results.
Later, we joke about it
because that's not really true.
We witnessed this at the Olympics
when our goalkeeper, Vincent Gerard,
had about 40% saves,
and we still lost the match.
So I always tell goalkeepers
that what they claim isn't really true.
But a good goalkeeper
makes a huge difference,
and we had Omeyer, and thanks
to him, we won so much.
We learned a lot from that,
because it really impacts your ego.
You always think you're
the most important person on the team.
You think everything depends on you.
Of course, that's not just your achievement,
because handball is a team sport.
That's also what I love about handball,
because you can never succeed alone.
Omeyer was a fantastic goalkeeper,
the best goalkeeper of all time.
If he had played for another team,
maybe we wouldn't have won so many titles.
If you look at Denmark,
you'll see they achieved
a lot of success thanks
to their goalkeeper.
They had Landin, and now they have
Nielsen, who plays for Barcelona.
Those are two of the best
goalkeepers in the world.
Their results are really
closely tied to the goalkeeper.
Did your father,
as a former goalkeeper, help you?
Did he suggest that you better understand
what the goalkeeper is thinking?
We always talked on the phone
the day before the match,
when I played in Kiel or anywhere else.
My father would talk to me
about the goalkeeper.
For example: "That goalkeeper is Danish
or Swedish, he dives down.
Try to lift the ball when you shoot,
or make the ball bounce off the floor."
So, we always talked about that,
and those analyses with him
were a form of preparation for me.
Mental preparation
and work on technique.
That helped me a lot.
Your father had special methods.
I read that when you were little,
and this later helped you,
not only to be a shooter but also a leader,
he wouldn't let you shoot in training.
You always had to assist
with the ball. -Yes, I had to.
He always gave me certain exercises.
For example: "You can't score a goal,
but if you want to win,
every player on your team
must score at least one goal."
You have to make sure
everyone scores at least once.
Or: "You can't play with your right hand,
only pass and shoot with your left."
He would always throw in
some exercises while I was training,
so I could develop even more.
Alright, tell me something
more about handball...
It seems to me that it's quite connected
to smaller places.
Metković, earlier, or Čačak...
No, Šabac Metaloplastika,
Kiel, Flensburg, and Pamplona...
It was less connected to Hamburg,
Paris, Zagreb, Barcelona.
Is it because it's difficult
to ignite interest in a community
when there's already football,
basketball, etc.?
And are you satisfied with the treatment
of handball in the world of sports?
The fact that handball
wasn't that popular in France
was also a motivation for me.
Through what we achieved
and how we played,
we wanted to spark interest
in handball in France,
to make it a true sport
and for people to follow and love it.
That was my goal
and additional motivation.
And now, when I look at it...
What can I say?
I would like handball to be bigger
and to receive more recognition.
But at the same time, I wish, even
though handball is not that popular,
that my children play it and that it
stays on a smaller level...
That the sport is played purely
for the sake of sport,
for mental and physical strength,
and that one learns from it.
But I see that some people already
expect a professional level in 10 years.
They talk about money
and business. -Horrible!
That's why I love this side of sport,
handball is not a business.
You can make a living from handball,
but you won't become a billionaire.
But you'll learn a lot from it in life.
And it is a real sport.
Now that I've gone through all of that,
I wouldn't want handball
to become like the NBA,
because handball creates
good people. -Well said.
I'll ask a few more questions.
You've been an athlete for a long time
and follow sports?
You're also a commentator
for the NFL and NBA.
You don't deny it, you've earned it,
you're a top-level athlete
who has succeeded.
Do you think you would've
succeeded in another sport?
Were you interested in individual sports?
-Yes, I followed almost every sport.
I followed tennis a lot,
because Luka played tennis.
I watched Goran win Wimbledon.
Then Đoković, Nadal, Federer...
I loved basketball, football,
and volleyball, every sport.
If my father had played volleyball,
I would've played volleyball too.
If he had played water polo,
I would've played that too.
I don't think I chose handball,
life chose that for me.
And I had the goal of being the best.
That's why I believe that up
to the age of 40 you live
what life has chosen for you.
Then you reflect and grow as a person.
I never really chose handball.
Handball chose me to play for it.
This is a show for children,
but also for parents.
How does one become a young
handball player in France?
Where does it start?
Does it start in school, clubs?
Do you have something like
a "Center of Information",
like in football? A regional center
where the best gather and train?
How does that work?
When do you start training?
We talked about that earlier.
In football, when you're the best.
In tennis, by the age of 12 or 13,
you're already entering that
Center of Information,
where the best of the best gather.
In France, you play handball normally
until the age of 15, in your club,
with your coach and your team
and you build a love for the sport.
Then, if you're among the best,
you enter that Center of Information,
those regional centers,
where top talents gather.
Until 15 you live a normal life.
And that's a huge strength.
It's not easy when you're 11 or 12
and you already end up in that
Center of Information.
Or when you're 13 or 14 and you're
earning more than your PE teacher.
That's not easy for kids,
nor for parents.
Many parents live their lives
through their children.
They try to make up for their own
failures through them.
This creates pressure on the kids.
What helped me was that my father
never pressured me
to be the best in the world or to succeed.
That was something I wanted.
He always said that brings
a lot of pressure,
and if I wanted to take that path,
he would help me,
but if I didn't succeed,
he would still love me,
even if I didn't become
a top handball player.
What mattered was that I was
happy in life.
That's very important for children.
That they're proud of their kids
and the sport they choose.
Sport is important,
because it's a school of life.
You can learn so much in a team
with a coach, with teammates,
opponents, referees,
both mentally and physically.
Of course, if you succeed as
a professional athlete, that's great,
but sport should be practiced.
All children should be involved,
not only in one sport,
but in different ones, to choose what
they love and to learn discipline,
and also to have fun.
That "Center of Information" is both
a good and a not-so-good thing.
That's the western way,
putting the best with the best.
But from the very start,
it creates rivalry.
But, when everyone is together,
maybe it slows you down,
so you don't go all the way,
but it creates chemistry and energy,
and that fifth element, the most
important in team sports and life.
One more thing. You and Luka
both succeeded in professional sports,
the sport you're now talking about.
Your parents instilled a strong work ethic
when it came to school
and gave you a proper upbringing.
You have two kids, right?
Will you guide them toward sports?
Would you be more satisfied if they did
amateur rather than professional sports?
That's a good question.
My son Alec plays handball.
He also plays basketball and tennis.
Nora has recently stopped
playing handball.
She said: "Mom, dad, I don't want
to do this anymore,
because I'm not good and I'm not
the best. I don't want to continue."
I try to explain to my children...
that I'll love them no matter
what they choose to do.
They don't have to succeed in sports,
they just need to be happy.
I don't want Alec to play handball
just because I did.
I know it'll be a hundred times
harder for him than for me.
My father meant everything to me,
but he wasn't the best in the world.
I was the best in the world
in handball.
We live in better conditions now
than when I was a child.
My parents did everything
to give us a good life.
But I know it'll be much harder
for him than for me.
I try to act the way my father
acted with me.
He gave me direction and taught me
discipline and work ethic,
so I would understand that
anything is possible in life,
if you really want it
and work hard for it.
But at the same time, you must
enjoy life because life is short.
You never know when it might end.
I try to pass on everything my mom
and dad taught me to my kids.
And, of course, I would love
for them to play sports.
As I said, sport is a school of life.
If you're involved in sports,
you have a better start in life.
Are you aware that kids today spend
less time outside playing than you did?
How do you deal with that?
Is anything being done in France
to help children have more fun?
It's a big topic of
"sports in school" in France.
We have the Olympics here,
and everything is going well.
Everyone loves the Olympics,
even though many thought
it wouldn't be good for Paris.
Now they've seen the power of sport,
not just because of medals.
Sport brings people together.
Now it needs to be introduced
into schools.
Sport has to become a bigger part
of life, not just intellectual work.
French culture loves film,
but sport is important too.
So now is a big moment for France,
because they've realized
that sport matters.
And now it needs to be integrated
into schools and clubs.
It's hard right now,
because budgets are being cut,
including the budget for sport.
So this is a key moment, and we'll see
how things go in France.
Nikola, thank you for your time.
Everyone who knows you says
you've stayed grounded.
And let's end with your mom.
She says that more than all the medals
and trophies, what she cherishes most
is that you and Luka have remained
normal, down-to-earth people.
And that's no surprise, because people
who are fulfilled and content
are usually the simplest
and most genuine people.
All the best, and thank you
for hosting us here in Paris.
It was truly a pleasure to meet you.
-It was a great honor for me as well.
Thank you!